.. |br| raw:: html

   <br />

.. _debugging:

#########
Debugging
#########

This page provides strategies for investigating errors encountered
while using GCHP. We invite you to also read these Supplemental Guides:

- :ref:`debug-guide`
- :ref:`errguide`

Note that those pages, unlike this one, also describe GEOS-Chem
Classic and HEMCO and thus not all examples are applicable to GCHP.

================
Configure errors
================

Configuration using CMake occurs right before compiling the model.
A common problem that results in configuration errors is if you forget
to run :literal:`git submodule update --init --recursive` after cloning
the GCHP repository. Check that you did this correctly by looking to
see if all subdirectories contain files, e.g. src/MAPL.

Other configuration problems usually have to do with your environment
and libraries. Check that you have libraries loaded and that they meet
the requirements for GCHP. Also check the logs printed to the build
directory, in particular :file:`CMakeCache.txt`.  That file lists the
directories of the libraries that are used. Check that these paths are
what you intend. Sometimes on compute clusters
there can be multiple instances of the same library loaded, such as
when using a spack-built library when your compute cluster already has
a different version of the same library set by default. Check the
library paths carefully to look for inconsistencies.

If you create a GitHub issue for a configuration error please include
the :file:`CMakeCache.txt` file in your help request as well as the
output sent to screen.

==============
Compile errors
==============

Usually build-time errors are self-explanatory, with an error message
indicating the file, line number, and reason for the error. However,
you may need to do some digging to find the error message .

If the build error is occuring with an unaltered GCHP version then the
issue is likely related to libraries. Check that your libraries meet
the requirements of GCHP as specified on ReadTheDocs. Also check your
ESMF version and make sure you built ESMF using the same libraries
with which you are building GCHP.

If you encounter a build error and cannot figure it out from what is
printed to the terminal, rebuild with verbose on and send standard
output and errors to a log. You can do this with

.. code-block:: console

   $ make -j VERBOSE=1 2>&1 | build.log

Search the log for string :literal:`error`, first with a space in
front of and after the word, and then only in front. This usually
hones in on where the error message occurs. You want to find the very
first occurrence of this in the log.

Read the error message carefully and then find the file and line
number specified. If it is not clear what the error is even from the
error message then you can try doing a string search on the GCHP
GitHub issues page, or on the web in general, for the generic error
message you get.

If you still have problems then please create an issue on GitHub
containing the GCHP version, your :file:`CMakeCache.txt` file, and
your build log.

=======================================
Run-time errors that occur early in run
=======================================

The first step in debugging run-time errors is always to look at the
logs. There are three main logs to look at, assuming standard error
and standard output are sent to different files.

:file:`gchp.YYYYMMDD_hhmmz.log`
   This is the log file defined in the run script and contains all
   GEOS-Chem and HEMCO standard output. Look at this log to see how
   far the run got. It is possible the error was trapped by HEMCO or
   GEOS-Chem in which case there will be error messages explaining the problem.

:file:`slurm*.out` (or other scheduler log)
   If running on a job scheduler this would be a separate file from
   the main GCHP log file assuming you are using one of the example
   run scripts. The error in this file will include a traceback of the
   error, meaning filenames and line numbers where the error occurred,
   moving up the call stack from deepest to highest. Go to the very
   first file listed and find the line number. Also read the error
   message in the traceback. Try to determine if the error is in
   GEOS-Chem, HEMCO, MAPL ExtData, MAPL History, MAPL Cap, or
   somewhere else.

:file:`allPEs.log`
   This log is output by the logger used in MAPL. By default it
   provides basic information on the MAPL run including general GCHP
   infrastructure setup as well as model I/O. You can configure the
   model to output more to this file. See the section on errors in MAPL below.

Choose next steps based on what you see in the logs. The following
sections go into detail about the different approaches you can take to
debugging based on the error. Read through all the topics to choose
which approach seems most appropriate.

For all strategies we recommend doing a short run at low resolution
and with few cores to make your debug runs fast and lightweight. You
should also always do a web search of the issue to see if there is an
existing GitHub issue about it. The `GCHP GitHub Issues page
<https://github.com/geoschem/GCHP/issues>`_ includes a search
bar. Depending on the issue, you might also find the problem already
discussed on the `GEOS-Chem
<https://github.com/geoschem/geos-chem/issues>`_ or `HEMCO
<https://github.com/geoschem/hemco/issues>`_ GitHub issues pages.

Segmentation faults
-------------------

If you are running into a segmentation fault then you should rebuild
with debug flags turned on. Do this by setting
:literal:`-DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug` during the configure step. See
compiling GCHP for more guidance on how to do this.  Once you rebuild
and run there may be more information in the logs if the problem is an
out-of-bounds error or floating point exception. Once the error is
fixed remember to rebuild without debug flags on. Running the model
after building with debug flags will make the model run very slow.

Read the traceback
------------------

If the problem is not a segmentation fault and the GCHP log messages
are not helpful then you should follow the error traceback to the
source code where the problem occurs. Always search for the first file
listed along with the line number. You can find the location of files
in GCHP by using the unix find command from the top-level source code
directory, e.g. :literal:`find . -name aerosol_mod.F90`.
Once you find the file and the line where the model fails you can read
the code above it to try to get a sense of the context of where it
crashed. This will give clues as to why it had a problem and may give
you ideas of what to do to try to fix it.

Errors in GEOS-Chem and HEMCO
-----------------------------

Sometimes enabling built-in debug prints from GEOS-Chem and HEMCO can
help find the error. You can enable additional prints to the main GCHP
log within configuration files :literal:`geoschem_config.yml` and
:literal:`HEMCO_Config.rc`.

#. Activate GEOS-Chem verbose output by editing
   :file:`geoschem_config.yml` as shown below.  This will tell
   GEOS-Chem to send extra printout to the
   :file:`gchp.YYYYMMDD_hhmmz.log` file.

   .. code-block:: yaml

      #============================================================================
      # Simulation settings
      #============================================================================
      simulation:
        # ... etc not shown ...
        verbose:
          activate: false   <=== Change this to true
          on_cores: root       # Allowed values: root all

#. Activate HEMCO verbose output by editing :file:`HEMCO_Config.rc` as
   shown below.  This will tell HEMCO to send extra printout to the
   :file:`gchp.YYYYMMDD_hhmmz.log` file.

   .. code-block:: kconfig

      ###############################################################################
      ### BEGIN SECTION SETTINGS
      ###############################################################################

      # ... etc not shown ...
      Verbose:                     false   <=== Change this to true


MAPL ExtData errors (data inputs)
---------------------------------

If you see :literal:`ExtData` in the error traceback then the problem
has to do with input files and you should check log file
:file:`allPEs.log`. If there is not enough information in
:literal:`allPEs.log` to determine what the
input file problem is then you should enable additional MAPL prints
and rerun. This is mostly recommended for input file issues because
MAPL ExtData is where most of the debug logging statements are
currently implemented.

Activate the :literal:`CAP.EXTDATA` and :literal:`MAPL` debug loggers
by editing the :file:`logging.yml` configuration file as shown below.
This will send all MAPL debug-level logging prints to the
:file:`allPEs.log` file.

.. code-block:: yaml

   loggers:

      # ... etc not shown ...

      MAPL:
          handlers: [mpi_shared]
          level: WARNING
          root_level: INFO   <=== Change this to DEBUG

      CAP.EXTDATA:
          handlers: [mpi_shared]
          level: WARNING
          root_level: INFO   <=== Change this to DEBUG

See `logging.yml <config-files/logging_yml.html>`__ for more
information on the MAPL logger config file. Contact the GEOS-Chem
Support Team if you need help deciphering the resulting log output.

If needed, you can also turn off certain emissions in
:file:`HEMCO_Config.rc` to verify which inventory is causing
problems. This can sometimes help hone in the sections of the
configuration files to look for typos.

If the problem is due to adding new input files then you may have an
issue in either the configuration files or with the file itself. It is
common to run into these sorts of errors when adding new input files because of strict rules for import files within MAPL and the need to follow a specific format
for input data in configuration files. Make sure that you read the ReadTheDocs
pages on `HEMCO_Config.rc <config-files/HEMCO_Config_rc.html>`__ and
`ExtData.rc <config-files/ExtData_rc.html>`__.
Also see NASA wiki page on `supported ExtData input files
<https://github.com/GEOS-ESM/MAPL/wiki/Guide-to-Supported-ExtData-Input-Files>`_.

Diagnostic errors
-----------------

If :file:`MAPL_HistoryGridCompMod.F90` appears in the error traceback
then the issue has to do with diagnostics in MAPL. This is usually due
to a typo in `HISTORY.rc <config-files/HISTORY_rc.html>`__. Try to
comment out different collections in your :file:`HISTORY.rc` file to see if
you can get past the issue.  If you isolate it to one or more
collections then look closely at the file to try to find a
typo. Following the traceback to the MAPL History code is also very
useful since it may tell you which entry in the config file is causing
the problem.

There can be other problems with GCHP diagnostics that do not have to
do with MAPL History.  If your log has error messages from GEOS-Chem
about not being able to find an entry in the Registry, or if the error
traceback includes file :file:`gchp_historyexports_mod.F90`, then the
issue is likely in GEOS-Chem. You can print out more diagnostic
information to the GCHP log by enabling verbose prints in GEOS-Chem
(see earlier section on this page).

You can print out even more information by manually uncommenting
:literal:`CALL Print_DiagList`, :literal:`CALL Print_TaggedDiagList`,
and :literal:`CALL Print_HistoryExportsList` within
:literal:`src/GCHP_GridComp/GEOSChem_GridComp/geos-chem/Interfaces/GCHP/gchp_historyexports_mod.F90`.
Then rebuild and rerun. This will show you what diagnostics GEOS-Chem
"registers", meaning how it interprets :file:`HISTORY.rc`, as well as
what diagnostics MAPL makes into imports. Any mismatch in these lists
will result in a run error. Note that MAPL creates imports for all
fields in collections that are turned on using the name that appears
in :file:`HISTORY.rc`. GEOS-Chem's registry of fields is more
complicated because it uses the field names to determine which arrays
the data are located in. Mismatches are thus usually because of a
problem in GEOS-Chem's parsing of the configuration file.

Other MAPL errors
-----------------

If the error is in MAPL but is not in ExtData or History then you
should still enable additional MAPL prints to log and rerun. See the
section above on ExtData errors for how to do that. Currently most
logging messages are in ExtData but there are a few others that might
be useful. You can also add your own within MAPL. See the next section
for how to do that.

If the error is in MAPL and the traceback leads you to a call to ESMF
then you should enable ESMF error log files in GCHP and rerun. Look
for file :literal:`ESMF.rc` in your run directory. Open it and set the
:literal:`logKindFlag` parameter to
:literal:`ESMF_LOGKIND_MULTI_ON_ERROR` and run again. You
should then get ESMF error log files upon rerun. There will be one log
file per processor and each file will start with :literal:`PET`.
More often than not the ESMF error message will appear in every file.

Add your own prints
-------------------

Sometimes the best way to find the problem is to add print commands to
the source code, rebuild, and rerun. This is particularly true if you
know it is failing in a loop reading data files or parsing a
configuration file. You can find examples in GEOS-Chem and HEMCO on
printing messages from within nearly all files.  For MAPL you can use
the logger. Search MAPL for :literal:`lgr%debug` to find examples.

======================================
Run-time errors that occur late in run
======================================

To be added

==================
Performance issues
==================

Performance issues in the model generally include speed and memory.

Inspecting memory
-----------------

Memory statistics are printed to the GCHP log each model timestep by
default. This includes percentage of memory committed, percentage of
memory used, total used memory (MB), and total swap memory (MB). This
information is always printed and is not configurable from the run
directory. However, additional memory prints may be enabled by
changing the value set for variable :literal:`MEMORY_DEBUG_LEVEL` in
run directory file :literal:`GCHP.rc`. Setting this to a value greater
than zero will print out total used memory and swap memory before and
after run methods for gridded components GCHPctmEnv, FV3 advection,
and GEOS-Chem. Within GEOS-Chem, total and swap memory will also be
printed before and after subroutines to run GEOS-Chem, perform
chemistry, and apply emissions. For more information about inspecting
memory see the :literal:`Memory` section of the `output files page
<output_files.html>`__.

Inspecting timing
-----------------

Model timing information is printed out at the end of each GCHP
run. Check the end of the log fille :literal:`allPEs.log` for a breakdown of component
timing. See the :literal:`Timing` section of the `output files page
<output_files.html>`__ for instructions on how to read the timing
information printed to log.
